-*- org-image-actual-width: 250; -*-

* Foundations
** The Rules of Go

1. Stone Placement

   Go is a two-player game. One player takes Black, and the other takes White,
   with Black going first. Players alternately place stones on intersections
   of the board.

2. Chains and Liberties

   Stones of the same color connected through lines form a chain. The chain's
   liberty is the number of adjacent empty intersections. For example, in fig.
   000, the numbers are the liberties of the chains.

   + (fig. 000) [[file:./img/000.png]]

   A chain with zero liberties is "dead" or "captured" and is removed from the
   board, with the captured stones (fig 001, 002).

   + (fig. 001) [[file:./img/001.png]]
   + (fig. 002) [[file:./img/002.png]]

3. No-Suicide

   A move cannot leave one's own stones without liberties, unless it
   simultaneously captures an opponent's chain. In this case, the opponent's
   chain is captured and removed, while one's own chain remains on the board
   (fig 003, 004).

   + (fig. 003) [[file:./img/003.png]]
   + (fig. 004) [[file:./img/004.png]]

4. No-Repetition (Ko)

   A move cannot recreate a previous board position, a rule known as ko. For
   example, starting from fig. 005 if Black has captured a stone as shown,
   White cannot immediately recapture in the same position. Instead, White
   must play elsewhere first, hoping Black responds, allowing White to retake
   later.

   + (fig. 005) [[file:./img/005.png]]

5. Territory Counting

   - End-of-game example on a 7x7 board

     Fig. 006 shows a completed game where additional moves would not affect
     the score. Black has one large group totaling 27 points, while White has
     two groups (11 points each) totaling 22 points.

     + (fig. 006) [[file:./img/006.png]]

     Typically, the player with more points wins; thus, Black would win here.
     However, due to Black's advantage of playing first, White is
     conventionally given 7.5 free points to start with, bringing White's
     score to 28.5 points. With this, White wins by 1.5 points.

** The Way of Survival: Two Eyes

An important notion in Go is "eye". An eye is a connected empty space
surrounded by a single color. For example, in fig. 006, the only Black group
has three eyes, while each of the White groups has two eyes.

Notice that each group must have two eyes to survive until the end of the
game. What if a group has only one eye? As shown in fig. 007, the single black
group will eventually be captured due to the exception in the No-Suicide rule,
leading to its inevitable death.

+ (fig. 007) [[file:./img/007.png]]

To ensure a group's survival, it must have at least two eyes. This is because
your opponent can only place one stone per turn and must follow the no-suicide
rule, making it impossible for them to fill both eyes.

Therefore, it is crucial at critical moments to make two eyes (e.g. Black
plays at the triangles in fig. 008), or conversely to prevent your opponent
from making two eyes by "breaking eye" (e.g. White plays at the triangles in
fig. 008).

+ (fig. 008) [[file:./img/008.png]]

However, focusing solely on making your group absolutely live can slow your
pace too much. For example, in fig. 009, after six moves, Black creates a
perfectly safe group but controls only 8 points, while White controls half of
the board!

+ (fig. 009) [[file:./img/009.png]]

Striking a balance between efficiency and resiliency is key. Mastering this
balance is a high-level skill, and even the best players or the fastest
computers can't achieve it perfectly.

One implication is that a group of stones can be effectively dead before it's
officially captured. In fig. 010, for example, although White's group still
has 10 liberties, we know it won't survive because there's no space to create
two eyes.

+ (fig. 010) [[file:./img/010.png]]

Consider another example: In fig. 011, the Black stone has four liberties and
appears to have plenty space to form two eyes within the marked area. However,
it has no "time". Indeed, it is clear that creating two eyes would require at
least five additional moves (fig. 012), and White can interrupt this attempt
at any time. Therefore, this Black stone is effectively dead.

+ (fig. 011) [[file:./img/011.png]]
+ (fig. 012) [[file:./img/012.png]]

This raises the question: when should Black have escaped with this stone? Was
it fig. 013, fig. 014, or fig. 015?

+ (fig. 013) [[file:./img/013.png]]
+ (fig. 014) [[file:./img/014.png]]
+ (fig. 015) [[file:./img/015.png]]

The perfect timing remains unknown in general, as it is a computationally
complex question that even the fastest computer cannot answer with absolute
certainty. Though Go is a finite game, its behavior unfolds in ways that are
effectively infinitesimally continuous, reaching enormous complexity. (This
intricacy brings to mind Conway's Game of Life and the idea that, like Go, our
world might also be a vast, finite machine - where simple rules give rise to
complex, seemingly infinite patterns.)

This introduces the concept of *thickness* in Go. A group of stones isn't simply
alive or dead; it has a health status that exists on a continuous
spectrum—something even computers can't precisely calculate.

Mastery in Go involves skillfully assessing and managing the thickness of the
groups. What makes the game engaging, almost “near-art,” is watching strong
players overturn your perception of a group's vitality, bringing unexpected
liveliness and drama to the board!

** Sample Games

In this section, let's examine two sample games on a 7x7 board. The first game
is straightforward, while the second is more rugged, demonstrating the
importance of fundamentals.

In the first game, Black and White each root at the corners and Black takes
the center (fig. 016). Then White begins probing the areas where they meet
(fig. 017). Both players then solidify their boundaries (fig. 018).

+ (fig. 016) [[file:./img/016.png]]
+ (fig. 017) [[file:./img/017.png]]
+ (fig. 018) [[file:./img/018.png]]

In the end, Black has 22 points, and White has 27 points. With 7.5 free
points, White reaches 34.5 points and wins.

In the second game, the openings are similar. However, White goes too far
while probing, giving Black an opportunity to bend the White stone into
Black's territory (by playing at A in fig. 019). This puts the White stone in
a highly vulnerable position, and further analysis suggests it's almost
impossible to save. Such mistakes—and subtler ones like it—are common in all
games. If Black fails to recognize the chance to punish, Black might play a
defensive move instead (e.g. B in fig. 019), missing the opportunity to gain
an advantage. Conversely, if Black sees the opportunity but misplays the
punishment, they risk losing even more points.

+ (fig. 019) [[file:./img/019.png]]

The game continues, and once again, in fig. 020, White prioritizes speed over
defense too much when a defensive move is needed to prevent a double
pre-capture at A.

+ (fig. 020) [[file:./img/020.png]]
